(dog barks)
SEAN BEAN: One gang has become
synonymous with Birmingham
in the 1900s.
But were they really
the smartly dressed. ruthless family
we've all seen on screen?
Or was the truth
much more dangerous?
This is the story of
the real Peaky Blinders.
(sombre music)
In 2013.
an award-winning television series
would burst onto our screens.
But
what was the real-life inspiration?
Who were the real Peaky Blinders?
And who was the real Tommy Shelby?
Birmingham in the 1860s
through to the '70s
was in the process
of rapid and spectacular change.
Its population was exploding:
it was approaching over 400.000
by 1871.
We made
anything that the world wanted.
It was buttons. it was guns.
it was jewellery. it was brassware.
it was pens. Tell us
what you wanted. we could make it.
Birmingham
at the turn of the century
is really a city of two halves.
On the one hand.
it's doing really well
in relation to other
industrial cities of the Midlands
and the North. However.
that wealth comes at the expense
of the people
who labour for it.
the working class.
Their lives are very different.
There was hundreds. thousands
of people flooding to the area
for work. to improve their lot
for themselves and their families.
There was lots of deprivation.
people coming in
for quite poorly paid
manual labour jobs
and struggling to make ends meet.
BEAN: The living conditions
for the poor were horrendous.
Thousands of hard-working families
crowded into back-to-back houses.
three. maybe four families
to one house.
sharing one communal toilet outside.
They were entombed almost
in this cycle of poverty.
It was a battle every day
against King Poverty.
and that king was relentless
and he was uncaring.
They are expected to labour
for the prosperity
of the British Empire
until eventually they die.
BEAN: Some aspects of human nature
don't seem to change
from one age to the next.
When people are given
no opportunity. no outlet.
no escape from the situation.
you will only ever get one result:
violence.
Fighting was almost
a leisure activity for some men.
They're living in poverty.
they own nothing.
They are looked down upon.
disparaged.
But the one thing that they've got
is their fighting prowess.
So in a poorer street.
those men that were regarded
as tough gained status.
It was something that they had.
BEAN: Under these circumstances
it's pretty clear
that violence wasn't just
a means of survival.
it was a way of
expressing the frustrations
and discontent with their lives.
They're called 'sloggers'
from 1872 because they slog.
And they are
the worst gangs for violence
and the most notorious gangs
in Birmingham from late 1860s
to the turn of the 20th century.
When you think about crime
at that time.
if we try to make sense of it
with compassion. some of that crime
would have in many ways
seen to be out of necessity.
So if you don't have any food
and want to keep your family alive.
you'll steal food for them.
I think again.
compassion for where some of that
early criminal behaviour comes from.
It was a very violent time.
and you can see lots of records
and evidence of different weapons
that would be used.
They'd use anything
they could get their hands on:
steel toe-cap boots. belt buckles.
any bits of brick or stones
or anything they find on the floor.
lots of evidence of assaults
where objects and missiles
have been thrown at another person.
Their main weapon is their belts.
They wrap the belt round the wrist.
they grab hold and make sure
they've got it caught
in the palm of the hand.
And then they buckle it.
leaving about eight inches.
and then they slash.
cause terrible injuries.
They are not organised criminals.
these are all hooligans.
BEAN: If you've got to work
six days a week
from morning till night for pennies.
and with no way out.
violence is a language.
It's just the only way to be heard.
But where do the Peaky Blinders
fit into all this?
Who were they?
The term 'peaky blinder'
is a fashion statement.
The Peaky Blinders are often called
'The Bell-Bottom Crew.'
They wear bell-bottom trousers
tight to the knee
and then wide. 22 inches wide.
And they have something
like this scarf. called a daff.
a silkish-type scarf.
They're wearing a billycock.
They have prison-cropped hair.
almost bald.
but they like a quiff.
They like to show it off.
So they steam the billycock
and they make the brim
into like a funnel.
and they pull it over one eye.
Hence the brims blinding the eye.
And when the flat cap comes in.
all they do. they just pull the cap
over the eye to blind it.
So they've got a distinct fashion.
and the first time that the term
'peaky blinder' is used
in the press in Birmingham
is March 1890.
BEAN: The mythology
surrounding the Peaky Blinders
is that they kept razors
in their caps.
and they used these
as lethal weapons when required.
I don't believe that any gangster
ever had a razor blade
in their cap. because it would be
mentioned in the newspapers.
I found no authoritative evidence
that there were razor blades
in caps.
An inoffensive chap
called George Eastwood
goes into the bar of the Rainbow pub
on the corner of High Street.
Bordsley and Adley Street.
not far from the Bull Ring.
He's a teetotaller.
Sadly. he's picked the wrong night.
He's drinking a ginger beer.
And three hard men
with an evil reputation come in.
and they insult him
for drinking a soft drink.
And a chap called Thomas Mucklow.
the captain of the gang...
...says "What you drinking that tak
for?" He says.
"Mind your own business.
I can drink what I want."
And a 14-year-old lad was a witness.
and he said they shouted.
"Give it to him hot. lads."
Oh. poor George.
they did give it to him hot.
After the attack on George Eastwood.
the next day there was an articl
e in the newspaper reported on it.
saying it was
by the Peaky Blinder gang.
During the 1880s you get the rise
of the sensationalist press.
the kind of modern tabloid press.
and the way in which
the media reports on crime
is completely different
at this point:
they have sensational headlines
that are extremely eye-catching.
The media
is a really important part of
the creation
of a new criminal stereotype
at the end of the 19th century.
So looking through
the original newspaper articles.
it would appear that there isn't
one specific gang
called the Peaky Blinders.
Even judges
start to refer to poor criminals
as being of 'the Peaky class.'
Any criminal involved in theft.
gambling. assaults.
attacking police officers.
they're all called Peaky Blinders.
And among the Peaky class criminals.
some of the very worst
were the Sheldon brothers.
Stephen Knight. the creator
of the television series.
has said that the spark
for the Shelbys was the Sheldons.
The Sheldons had five brothers.
Two of them were respectable.
Three became
three of the worst criminals
and violent men in late Victorian
and Edwardian Birmingham.
John was the oldest.
By 1881. when he was 15.
he'd already got convictions
and throughout the 1880s and '90s.
he's a professional thief.
He's not a man to be messed with.
He. on one occasion with a friend.
is coming out of a pub
and they'd taken a dislike
to an Irish bloke. an old man.
and they batter him in the street.
He lives opposite with his daughter.
the Irish bloke.
His daughter comes over to try
and stop them. pleading with them.
"Please leave my father alone."
Oh no. they don't stop.
Sheldon grabs hold of
the poor young woman by the hair.
throws her to the ground.
they drag her along. kicking her.
That's the kind of man he was.
The next oldest brother was Samuel.
Only five foot one and a quarter.
Despite his small size.
he's a nasty. vicious man.
and he's scarred with the results
of his fights. on his arms.
on his legs. on his hands.
Another man you don't mess with.
Like his brother.
he has no respect for women.
He's one of a group of men
that burst into the house
of a 16-year-old young woman.
They smash the door down.
she flees upstairs.
and then in court it said
they all committed
a 'most disgusting assault' on her.
Joseph is the youngest brother.
In 1899.
he's named as a member
of the feared Bar Street gang.
and it's pretty certain that his two
older brothers were in that gang.
He's also given as a Peaky Blinder.
So it appears what we have
is this rapid rise
in street violence.
with people like the Sheldons
to the fore. a perception fuel led.
of course. by what we could call
early tabloid journalists
fanning the flames
of middle class panic.
In 1899. the gang problem
was so bad in Birmingham
that the Chief Constable resigned
and the Birmingham Watch Committee.
the counters that ran the police.
fetched over from Ireland
Charles Horton Rafter.
Rafter realised.
as soon as he come in.
the Birmingham police
was badly undermanned.
so he worked
on a rapid recruitment campaign.
Rafter insisted. though.
that his recruits had to be tall.
they had to be fit.
That meant
that these young fit officers
could now go about in pairs
in the toughest districts.
where the reign of the ruffian
was imposed by the Peaky Blinders.
Before. many of these areas
only had one policeman on a beat.
Now there's two.
They're big. strong lads.
And the story that was passed on
for generations
in the Birmingham police
was that Rafter asked three things
of his recruits:
can you read? Can you write?
Can you fight?
Because they'd have to.
SEAN BEAN: In 1914.
the outbreak of the First World War
drained Britain
of a great many
of its fighting age men.
Perhaps unsurprisingly. the crimes
that had been associated
with the Peaky class dropped.
But we know that history
never gives us any short answers.
So what else contributed
to this decreasing gang activity?
There's organic factors
that are working together.
There's a High Church of England
vicar called Father Pinshard
who starts
a rudimentary boxing club.
They're learning respect.
discipline. Football is becoming
a really popular participation sport
as well as a spectator sport.
And instead of gathering
on waste ground
to play pitch and toss.
they're playing football now.
And just as the gangs
are disappearing.
the cinema comes in.
Instead of joining a street gang.
lads are going to the pictures
two or three nights a week.
But of course.
all the social programmes
in the world
wouldn't be able
to erase criminality completely.
There were some who were already
too embedded in a life of crime
to ever step away.
And there's one name that keeps
coming up again and again
in history books. police records
and arrest warrants.
not just in Birmingham.
but up and down the country.
William Kimber.
born 7th February. 1882.
Born and raised
in the tough Summer Lane area.
notorious for its Peaky Blinders.
it wouldn't be long before Kimber
would have his first run-in
with the law.
-His mum was an Irish Brummie.
His dad was English. There is
no suggestion that either of them
were ever involved in any crime.
But Kimber at the age of 12.
he's birched for a petty theft.
Now. that means
that he is forced to lie down.
and they pull down his trousers.
Then they take
a bunch of robust birch twigs.
wired at one end. and whip him.
Again. I'm not excusing
Billy Kimber's later criminality.
but at an early age the state
is using violence against him.
It would be remiss to think
that it hadn't had an impact.
something that significant
in terms of being punished
in that way.
possibly being shamed.
Shame is something
that we don't talk about
when we look at these acts.
We just look at the act itself.
not about how vulnerable you are
when you're in that position.
and the shame that comes with that.
And I think
these are all things
that he used as fuel to get out.
and do anything he could to never
experience that situation again.
He obviously learnt to fight
early on.
The only Brummie I ever met
who knew him said.
"Carl. he was strong as an ox.
and he fought like a lion."
Then. with that reputation
as the top man. the top fighter.
he can control things.
When you really get down to it.
on the streets. right here right now
where it matters.
violence is everything.
But the threat of violence
just in a moment
is even more powerful.
That's why people are very happy
to let their deeds to be known.
no matter how gruesome.
because this sends a message.
It's like psychological warfare.
-He came from a place
where fear lived all the time.
I imagine he lived
in a state of fear.
"Am I gonna get my next meal?
Am I going to be beaten up?
"Are we going to be attacked
as a family?" So fear fuel led this.
He felt fear as a young person.
and then he wanted
to become the instigator of fear.
because that's how you'd stay safe.
His favourite punch
was to the solar plexus.
Once you hit somebody really hard
in the stomach.
it makes them soil themselves.
Now. can you imagine that?
Not only have you been beaten up.
not only you're bent over in pain.
but you have been humiliated.
He was very brutal.
but the difference. you know.
with him was he just had a polish
that showed
so much more street smarts.
Billy Kimber was a fighting man.
a feared fighting man.
who through his physicality.
his fierceness. his viciousness.
became the leader of a group
of the most feared criminals
in England at the time.
the Birmingham Gang.
According to police reports.
by 1918
Kimber has become the leader
of several small gangs.
But street fighting was no longer
the name of the game.
Kimber was after money. real money.
And where was he gonna find that?
CHINN: Racing booms
in the immediate aftermath
of the First World War.
Lots of men are coming home
with payments from the Army. Navy.
A lot want to drink and gamble
and enjoy themselves.
There's masses of people
going to racecourses.
So all the money populated there
and of course all the people
who wanted money
populated there behind them.
-And by the early 20th century
he's got a gang with his brothers
Joe and Harry. and other hard men
who are going to the racecourses
of the Midlands
and the North. They're known as
the Brummager Boys.
They pickpocket. and if you know
you've been pickpocketed
and try to stop it. they're going to
duff you up badly.
because there's hardly
any racecourse security
and the few policemen there
are scared.
These gangs
also blackmail bookmakers.
“You want to stand on that pitch?
That's a good pitch.
"you've got to give us a fiver."
“You've got a stall
you're standing on.
"two and sixpence." That's 12.5 pence
a race. Six races.
that's 15 shillings. 75 pence.
That's as much as a poor man
could earn in a week.
"You've got a blackboard. you write
on the blackboard
the names of the horses.
What do you need for that?"
A stick of chalk. two and a tanner.
two and sixpence a race.
At Epsom. Doncaster.
the big meetings.
there could be hundreds of
bookmakers. This is big income.
Billy Kimber and his gang
made at least £400 a day.
which translates to £22.000 a day.
about eight million a year
in today's money.
Now. Billy Kimber
and the Birmingham Gang
ran the racecourse rackets
in the Midlands and the North.
No challengers in the Midlands
and the North.
up towards Newcastle
they've got their own gang.
They don't bother with Scotland.
Glasgow gangs run courses there.
So it's no longer just fighting
each other over territory.
but actually the organisation
of criminal rackets around betting.
gambling. liquor licences.
So they're a really distinctive
new period of organised crime
in the city.
BEAN: So in a short space of time.
Kimber's influence
had become widespread.
His gang.
known as the Birmingham Gang.
are terrorising racecourses
up and down the country
with no regards
for the consequences.
Could this man
be the real Tommy Shelby?
SEAN BEAN: By the beginning
of the 1920s.
almost all British racecourses
are under the control of one man:
Billy Kimber.
The Birmingham Gang
and their London allies
are extorting money
from the bookmakers.
but they're racist.
They're anti-Semitic.
They would target
Jewish bookmakers in the East End.
One of whom
is a man called Alfie Solomon.
Now. compared to Kimber
and most other members of the gangs
who deserted in the First World War.
Solomon served with honour.
He received three service medals
and he comes out
and he becomes a bookmaker.
He's a secular Jewish man.
His dad's got a greengrocer's
in Covent Garden.
They had a servant growing up.
But he's bookmaking.
BEAN: One event will change
the course of Alfie Solomon's life
like no other.
And a really vile man
called Tommy Armstrong.
slogger.
member of the Birmingham Gang.
comes past. and he's offering
11 to 4 on a horse.
And Armstrong says.
"I'll have 12 quid on that
on the nod."
That meant he wanted it on credit.
If it loses. is he going to pay up?
Of course he's not. But if it wins.
does he want paying?
Of course he does. Solomon says.
"No I ain't taking the bet.
"I'm not having that." Anyway.
it kicked off.
The horse won.
Armstrong's mucky drunk by now.
He comes back. demands his money.
Solomon refuses.
Armstrong took his field glasses.
his heavy viewing glasses.
smashed 'em
into the face of Alfie Solomon.
He collapsed on the floor
in a bloody mess.
and then Armstrong slammed him
in his face with his boots.
Solomon's left there. prone.
his face a bloody mass.
and with several teeth missing.
This attack on Alfie Solomon
transforms him.
I've got no evidence at all
before the attack
that he was a vicious criminal.
but afterwards
he certainly becomes one.
Alfie Soloman
seems to suddenly become violent
out of absolutely nowhere.
That shows to me underlying rage.
and it needed to be unlocked.
Someone doesn't just become violent
one day out of absolutely nowhere.
for no reason.
I mean. he had a reason.
he was beaten up.
But that's not a reason
to start a criminal career.
So I think that unlocked a rage
in him that he had
for a very long time.
Alfie Solomon
was just another link in the chain.
There are different groups.
So you have the money earners
and you have the people
who need to enforce that. enforcers.
They'll go out. do the street work.
and they'll break arms.
and they'll kill people.
and dominate people.
and they'll collect the money.
But that's all they're good for.
But the bosses.
the real organised crime figures
that do very well at this
and rise up. they can do both.
BEAN: Billy Kimber had gone from
a backstreet thug. petty criminal
to one of the first
organised crime bosses in England.
I think some of the crimes
that we see Kimber engage in
are narcissistically driven.
He became a little bit addicted
to what he was getting.
and it felt really good.
and he felt he deserved more
because of that.
and I think that drove him
to then want to go to London
and kind of pursue crime there
as well.
BEAN: Kimber and his boys
had been raking in money
working the country's racecourses
like their own personal gold mine.
But one thing we know
about organised crime
is that when money's flowing.
you'd better watch your back.
London bookmaker Alfie Solomon
has just been severely beaten
by Billy Kimber's lieutenant.
Tommy Armstrong.
CHINN: Alfie Solomon then turns to
the governor
of the Jewish East End underworld.
Edward Emmanuel.
He was king of the underworld
with the Jewish people of the time
in the East End.
He was really cunning.
he knew how to put things together.
-Like Kimber.
he's a fearsome fighter. a thug.
a man who people are scared of.
On one occasion he has a fight.
he gets shot.
Even though he's shot. he chases
the bloke down the street
and batters him.
But he's also. like Kimber.
got something up here.
He's got a brain.
Edward Emmanuel
is a very clever figure.
He's very good at what he does.
Cos he's one of them people
who understands
to keep in the background
is where the real power is.
He was very good
at moving guys around.
which is another real trait
of an organised crime boss.
In my opinion. Edward Emmanuel
is England's first godfather.
He wants to get rid of Kimber
and his London allies.
He's got a team
of Anglo-Jewish tearaways.
but on their own
they're not strong enough.
Things move very rapidly
after Solomon turns to Emmanuel
for help. Emmanuel turns to
an up and coming young gangster.
His mum is English.
his dad was Italian.
but came to England as a youngster
from Parma in northern Italy.
The Sabini Gang
were quite interesting.
They was vicious thugs. There was
about 300 members of the Sabini gang
at its prime. Where they settled
was in Clerkenwell.
in Little Italy of course.
just the other side
of the East End of London.
And he started off as a bouncer.
that was his first kind of innings
into that world. He was
a very rough and tumble.
very in your face street brawler.
And they're called in
to back up Alfie Solomon
and Emanuel's Anglo-Jewish tearaways
against Kimber's Birmingham Gang
and their London mates.
So began the biggest gang war
this country had ever known.
So the Birmingham Gang
and their London allies
realise Sabini's been called in.
They corner him
at Greenford trotting track.
They're shouting.
"We're gonna murder him."
They've got wood. planks of wood.
They're hitting him. Somebody says.
"Get a gun. shoot him."
Luckily. he's saved by the police.
It turns out
that the gun wasn't registered.
He should have really been
prosecuted for it.
but he got away with it.
Throughout spring and summer of '21.
there are shootings. beatings
at racecourses.
and in London and around
railway stations in the capital.
It really was dangerous.
Things are getting out of hand.
This isn't good for business
. The newspapers pick up on this.
Racecourse ruffians.
ruffs of the turf.
all these kinds of phrases
are being used.
Too much attention from the police.
BEAN: It's interesting. isn't it?
Press attention
only really gets going
once there's a spectacle.
When ordinary bookmakers
were getting extorted.
no-one really paid attention.
CHINN: So someone calls a meeting.
It's going to be at Collier Street.
the house in King's Cross
where Sabini's now living.
They decide
that they'll have to make peace
for the sake of their businesses.
Billy Kimber turns up
with some of the McDonalds.
They're having a good drink.
and he's going to leave
Who turns up but Alfie Solomon?
Now. they're racist.
They hate Jewish men and women.
and Kimber goes for him.
Pulls a revolver
and he calls him racist names.
There's a scuffle.
and in the scuffle.
as Alfie Solomon is trying to stop
Kimber from shooting him...
the gun goes off...
(gunshot)
..and the bullet actually goes
into Kimber's back.
Everybody disperses.
Kimber's found unconscious
on the street outside.
He's sent to hospital.
Allies of Kimber told me
that that night
members of the London gang
supporting Kimber
and the Birmingham Gang
surrounded the hospital.
It tells you the power
that Kimber had.
They go to court.
Solomon admits
that he accidentally shot Kimber.
Billy Kimber is a witnes
s who refuses to testify.
and all he says is this:
“If he says he shot me.
well. that's up to him.
But only cowards use revolvers.
and I would rather
blow my brains out
than use a shooter."
The case is dismissed.
BEAN: But the worst was yet to come.
What do we actually know
about Billy Kimber?
We know that Billy Kimber
and the Birmingham Gang
are determined to maintain
their dominance down south.
But Edward Emmanuel and Darby Sabini
have other ideas.
Epsom. Probably
the biggest meeting of the year.
The Birmingham Gang decide
they're gonna really show
who's in charge.
BEAN: The Epsom Derby.
one of the biggest racing events
of the year.
was attended by over 200.000 people.
But get this: they had no security.
This is a gift for Billy Kimber.
Birmingham Gang members
are going down there.
terrorising bookmakers.
After racing.
some Leeds bookmakers are leaving
when they get attacked by 20-odd
really vicious. horrible men
from Birmingham.
They had been paying protection
to Kimber before.
but it looks like they're moving
towards Sabini and to Solomon.
The Birmingham Gang
inflict terrible injuries on them.
and then they decide to go
for a drink in a pub.
which is where
they're eventually arrested.
Out of the 20-odd.
17 men are sent down.
These 17 men
belong to different little crews
within the Birmingham Gang.
That weakens Kimber. He's lost
17 of his most feared fighters.
He then decides he's gonna make
a massive show of strength
at Bath in the summer.
The railway station at Bath
suddenly is surrounded
by a horde of Birmingham hard men.
Many of them are not part of
the Birmingham Gang.
but are attracted to Bath
by the opportunity of having a pop.
having a go at the Londoners.
particularly the Jewish Londoners.
Kimber's there.
His main fighters
who are not in prison are there.
They start
beating up Jewish bookmakers.
and Kimber and another
horrible Birmingham Gang member
batter Alfie Solomon. who goes down.
They also attack his clerk.
an inoffensive bloke
called Charles Bild.
They hit him with everything.
and then somebody smashes him
with a sandbag!
The poor bloke goes down
and eventually. when the police
come to save him. he's unconscious.
covered in blood.
BEAN: Billy Kimber gets charged
for that assault.
But in September 1921.
when it goes to court.
no-one shows up
to give evidence against him.
So the case is dismissed.
But before they leave. Kimber's
lawyer announces to the court.
“Don't worry. there'll be
no more of this trouble.
"because this
has all been sorted out."
Cleverly.
Edward Emanuel starts the Bookmakers
Protection Association
to stop the ruffianism on the turf.
to stop the blackmailing
of bookmakers.
Well. what then happens
is the Jockey Club like this.
they're really upset
by all the bad newspaper reports.
people
are going to stop coming racing.
so they back this new organisation.
which appears to be legitimate.
The police are quite happy.
cos they can say.
this is a legitimate organisation.
But what does he do?
He employs Derby Sabini and his men
as stewards
to enforce order.
But this was
a very clever strategic move
to protect the Jewish bookmakers
that are constantly being threatened
and attacked. and preyed upon
by. of course. Billy Kimber.
This also legitimised Darby Sabini
and everything
that they needed to do next.
including
protecting all their organisation.
Essentially. the Sabinis
are untouchable.
because the Jockey Club.
in control of flat racing.
and the police like the idea
of an official organisation
which they can support.
BEAN: Emmanuel has won.
The Birmingham boys
have been outwitted.
They can't operate down south
anymore.
So the boys insist
that no Southern bookmakers
can operate in the Midlands
or the North ever again.
It says here.
a meeting is finally called
at Beresford's House
to discuss terms of a truce.
By September.
newspapers are reporting
that the gangs have divided England
between them.
that the Sabinis
would have the south of England.
and that the Birmingham Gang
would have the Midlands
and the North.
This means
that until the mid-1920s
the Sabinis rule supreme
on Southern England's racecourses
and those in London.
But that was the time
for Billy Kimber to walk away.
What's fascinating about Kimber
and the Birmingham Gang
is that as soon as he steps away.
the organisation disintegrates.
They're all fighting each other
again. just like the slogging gangs.
Without him at the centre.
it all just falls apart.
Now. Emmanuel is moving
slowly away from gangsterism
into legitimacy.
and he sees an opportunity
to start up
a legitimate printing company.
which will print all printing needs
of the racecourse bookmakers:
their tickets.
instead of the chalk. runners.
racing lists. He's clever enough
to step back.
pull the strings of the Sabinis.
make money.
but start up
a legitimate printing company.
the Portsea Printing Press.
Now. down south
the Jockey Club have decided
they've got to take action.
They bring in a new force
of security men
and the Sabinis are gradually
pushed out.
But what they do.
they regroup in Soho.
They take over protection rackets
of the illegal drinking clubs
and the spielers.
They also extorted protection money
from restaurant owners. publicans.
not only in Soho.
but in their heartlands
of King's Cross and Clerkenwell.
Albert Dimes and Bert Marsh.
leading towards Jack Spott
and Billy Hill.
He dies a broken man in 1950.
Alfie Soloman was targeted
by other gangs
into the mid-1930s.
and unable to get police protection.
he then disappeared.
Kimber. so it's said. about 1926
shoots through the windows
of The Griffin.
one of the Sabinis' hangouts.
and flees to America.
where it's said he kills a man.
and then he goes off to Chicago.
Well. who's running Chicago
in '26? Al Capone.
Billy Kimber had a real depth
of a person
and you see this
all the way through his journey
from the street smarts
to the brutality
to the real CEO managerial decisions
that he made even back then.
which of course positioned him
as one of the leading lights
of organised crime in the UK.
-Kimber comes back.
By now he's married
to Elizabeth Garnham.
the sister of one of his pals
from Chapel Market.
And he was then clever enough
to realise when he was beaten
that he needed to go legitimate.
I think he was pushed into that
as well by his wife.
who like Sabini's wife.
wanted middle-class respectability
for their children.
BEAN: Kimber would eventually settle
in Devon in Torquey.
in a house overlooking the bay.
He too would reinvent himself
as
A legitimate racecourse bookmaker.
An advert he took out
with a local paper would read.
"Bet with Bill Kimber.
a man who's reliable."
And there's a real irony here.
because he becomes
a leading member
of the local Devon Bookmakers
Protection Association.
the very organisation
that in effect brought him down.
started by Kimber's nemesis
Edward Emmanuel
as a means for him
to take over down south.
but the BPA by the '30s
has become a legitimate.
respectable organisation.
We know that eventually
Billy did retire.
but prior to that. psychologically
he was on guard his whole life.
right from the beginning.
the slums in Birmingham
and throughout his entire
kind of criminal career.
I think what that does to a person
is it sets them
in this constant sense of fight
or flight. which means
your adrenal system is activated.
which means
that you can never really rest.
I think that is only sustainable
for so long in terms
of a person's lifespan.
I don't think it's something
you can do forever.
Kimber eventually dies in 1945
in a nursing home.
He died one of the last
of the real Peaky Blinders.
If we look at how Darby Sabini.
Alfie Solomon.
Billy Kimber are portrayed
in the series.
there is a fundamental difference.
Darby Sabini is depicted
as a Bella figura.
like a Sicilian Mafia don.
elegantly dressed.
with a walking cane.
He wasn't. He didn't wear
fancy clothes. He wasn't elegant.
He wasn't a Bella figura.
He wore a flat cap.
a collarless shirt.
working man's clothes.
He didn't speak Italian.
He regarded himself
as an Englishman.
Alfie Solomon is portrayed
as an Orthodox Jewish man.
He wasn't. He was from
a secular Jewish background.
a family settled in England
for generations. Billy Kimber
is given as a Londoner.
a small Londoner. He wasn't.
He was a Brummie.
-People like the romanticism.
the glamour of it all.
and this suggestion
of a different society
in Birmingham that people might not
have otherwise been aware of.
I think people
will always be drawn to gangsters.
because in many ways
they feel like the stuff of myth.
partly because
these men that we see.
and it's usually men.
sometimes women but usually men.
are very good at creating stories.
and very good at creating legacy.
and human beings. we like stories.
They create a mystery. I think
we're drawn to understanding that.
What lessons should we take
from the real Peaky Blinders
and the gangs of the 1920s?
Most importantly. gang members
and organised gangsters
are not meant to be admired.
BEAN: These were not
glamorous anti-heroes
who people looked to for support.
They weren't Robin Hood characters
that looked after the poor:
they preyed upon the poor.
They were feared members
of the working class.
They didn't look after the poor.
the Peaky Blinders.
they beat them up. bullied them.
Sabini. Kimber. Emmanuel
took money from poorer people
whenever they could.
I suppose
it's not really surprising
that a fictional portrayal
of a criminal organisation
doesn't match with the reality.
After all. it's the job
of historical fiction
to impart glamour to the everyday.
to make it exciting.
But what's fascinating isn't so much
that a brilliant television series
found a devoted audience. it's how
little attitudes have changed.
We're still convinced
that criminality
is largely
a working class phenomenon.
and street gangs.
they're not a thing of the past.
they exist today in every city
in the world. But why?
Perhaps
there is something innate in people
that makes them want to seek out
fellowship. community.
and where none exists.
construct their own.
But I suppose
that's why we need the legends.
But when reality
is not to our taste.
legends don't often
leave room for ordinary folk.
(jangly guitar music. male vocal)
Subtitles by Sky Accessible Services